Let us look back on all the different sorting
algorithms that we have considered.
So, one of the important criteria that we
should not forget is that, sorting often happens
in phases.
So, we might have a list of names of people
say Aswin, Bharathi, Chander and Deepa.
So, we have sorted this in order and they
might have got some marks in an exam.
So, they may be got 60, 43, 60 and 95, now
we might want to sort this by marks.
So, when we sort this by marks of course,
we need to exchange the position of Bharathi
and Ashwin, but we do not want to exchange
the position of Aswini and Chander.
So, in other words we do not want to disturb
the sorting of alphabetical orders.
So, the final answer should be Bharathi has
43, Ashwin has 60, Chander has 60 and Deepa
has 95.
But, it would be wrong if you said Chander
and then Ashwin not wrong, but undesirable.
So, if we have a list of students in alphabetical
order and then we sort by marks, we expect
that those with equal marks are still sorted
in alphabetical order.
So, in a spreadsheet where we have a kind
of a table with columns, so supposing we sort
by this column, and then we sort by this column,
the second sorting should not disturb the
order of the first sorting.
So, this is called stable sorting that is
if there was, so very often when you are sorting
you are sorting on one attribute, but there
may be other attributes.
So, a data item is not typically a unique
value, it is not just a number, but it is
aÉ So, you are taking names, marks and various
other addresses may be phone number and you
might sort on different things.
So, think of a spreadsheet where we might
sort on different columns.
So, each successive sort should not disturb
the previous sort, so this is called stable
sorting.
So, this is obviously desirable, because we
do it all the time, we really would be very
unhappy if the next round of sorting disturbed
the first round of sorting.
So, which of our algorithms are stable.
So, quick sort as shown is not a stable operation,
so remember that we took the pivot and in
the, at least in our implementation what we
did was we constructed this lower set and
then the upper set to the right of it, so
it is right, this is the picture we had and
then finally, and this is the crucial point,
we do this swap.
So, imagine that we have a situation where
here we had for example, at this point Ashwin
with the 60 marks and Chander with also with
60 marks.
So, at the point of constructing the lower
set, they were in the correct order as in
the original input.
But, now after swapping what happens is that
the pivot has come here and Chander with 60
marks has gone here.
So, this swapping operation has basically
reversed the order of A and C with respect
to what it was in the input and henceforth
therefore, this order will get jumbled.
So, this swap operation during partitioning
disturbs original order and this also happens
in things like selection sort.
Because, in selection sort wherever we do
this long distance thing, so remember in selection
sort we pick the minimum and then we exchange
it with the beginning.
Now, if the element at the beginning had the
same alphabetical order as, I mean it is smaller
with, in the second one now it moves to a
later point in the array and the order gets
disturbed.
So, any kind of long distance swapping is
very dangerous for stability.
What about merge sort?
Well, merge sort would normally we stable
providedÉ all we want is that something to
the right should not go to the left of something
in the original array.
So, we do not want somethingÉ If you have
two elements here and here which should remain
in this order, we do not want them to be exchanged.
Now, why they would be exchange?
They would be exchanged only if they were
equal, that is an only case where stability
gets destroyed, where equal elements are disturbed,
with respect to the previous sorting.
So, we have to make sure that no element from
the right comes to an element to the left
of something from the earlier array and when
you are merging, basically that is why we
said that in the case, A i is less than or
equal to B j, we pick from A and onlyÉ So,
if you had made the mistake of writing less
than and then we use greater than equal to,
select from B, then when they are equal, we
first pick from B and not from A and that
would create instability.
So, crucial in our merge operation is that
when A i is less than or equal B j we pick
the element from A in preference to B, so
this preserves the left right order of equal
elements with respect to the original order
and since merge sort as we have done in stable.
You can also check that similarly, if you
do insertion sort carefully, then insertion
sort is also stable and this is not to say
that quick sort cannot be made stable, it
is just that the way we have implemented it
quick sort is not stable.
Another criteria, which is related to what
we just saw is that we have only concentrated
on the number of steps required in order to
compare and exchange two elements.
But, you might want to do other things.
For instance, you might want to penalize movements
which take you across large segments of the
array.
So, you might want to say that it is not so
good to exchange things far away, it is better
to exchange things near each other.
So, something like bubble sort which we did
not look at, which only exchanges adjacent
elements would be better than something like
selection sort which exchanges across large
intervals.
Now, this could happen if data has a cost,
supposing you are sorting an array, but this
array is across different, it is so big that
it is not stored on a single server.
Then each time you want to swap from one server
to another, you could pay an extra cost which
is different.
So, in other words there might be different
criteria which are behind the scenes which
we do not see.
So, imagine when you are sorting something
by hand, supposing you are sorting a bunch
of heavy cartons, then you can imagine that
moving of heavy carton a long distance is
more expensive than moving it a short distance.
So, there could be other criteria which govern
your cost of sorting which we have not considered
at all in this and people have looked at these
things in the literature.
So, very often a question is asked which sort
is best.
So, unfortunately it turns out that no single
sorting algorithm is always guaranteed to
be the best, it really depends as, we said
like sorting depth, the movement and other
criteria.
Some sorting algorithm may work well in some
context, some in other contexts.
In most, memory based context for simple arrays,
quick sort is the best.
This is why as we said, quick sort is usually
the default implementation of choice for built
in sorting algorithms.
Provided we do something intelligent about
choosing the pivot and various other things.
On the other hand when we have to move a lot
of data, sometimes we cannot store the entire
thing if you are sorting a database.
We cannot sort the entire thing in the memory,
so actually we use a variation of merge sort
which is called external merge sort.
So, it really depends on the context, sometimes
we will use one, sometimes we will use another.
If there were a best algorithm, there would
be no need to study the other algorithms.
So, the very fact that many of these algorithms
are studied, shows that in different contexts
you might need to use one or the other idea
in order to make things work better.
We have seen merge sort as an order n log
n algorithm, there are other n log n algorithms
we will see one later on in this course called
heap sort.
The main thing to remember is that if you
have a naive n squared algorithm which is
not like quick sort provably n log n in the
average case, then this will only work for
small data.
However, sometimes for small data, the simplicity
of a naive algorithm beats the complexity
of a complicated algorithm.
So, you could even have hybrid algorithms,
you might use divide and conquer where n is
large and then when n becomes small then you
switch over to may be insertion sort.
So, there are many different strategies that
people use and very often experimentally they
arrive at some combination of strategies.
So, it is not enough to say that one algorithm
is the best, you need to have a good idea
about what works and what does not works,
so that you can tailor your sorting procedure
to suit your requirements.